NMS-14346: Document SNMP oid varbind pattern matching (#5041)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/operation/pages/events/sources/snmp-traps.adoc

[[ga-events-sources-snmp-traps]]
= SNMP Traps

OpenNMS {page-component-title} can receive and process SNMP traps/informs from SNMP-capable devices out of the box.
It receives SNMP traps via the xref:reference:daemons/daemon-config-files/trapd.adoc[trapd service daemon], which is enabled by default.

IMPORTANT: Disabling trapd renders {page-component-title} incapable of receiving SNMP traps.

{page-component-title} transforms these traps into events according to default preconfigured rules and those users create.

== Before you begin
There are a few tasks you must complete before OpenNMS can receive SNMP traps:

> . Configure the port on which OpenNMS can receive SNMP traps (see xref:deployment:core/getting-started.adoc#receive-snmp-traps[Receive SNMP Traps/Informs]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Configure the port on which OpenNMS can receive SNMP traps (see xref:deployment:core/getting-started.adoc#receive-snmp-traps[Receive SNMP Traps/Informs]).
By default, {page-component-title} listens on a non-standard port for trap messages.
```

. Ensure that SNMP-capable devices on your network are configured to send traps to {page-component-title}.

[[trap-config]]
== SNMP Trap Configuration: How To

> Configure SNMP traps to customize the types of trap information you receive and the conditions under which OpenNMS converts the trap into an event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure SNMP traps to customize the types of trap information you receive and the conditions under which {page-component-title} converts the trap into an event.
```

For example, you may want to see an event only when a device is down, or when a combination of criteria are met (for example, OID X with "major" severity level, and status "indeterminate").

> OpenNMS transforms these traps into events only when the conditions you define are met.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These traps are transformed into events only when the conditions you define are met.
```

There are several ways to configure {page-component-title} to customize the events you receive and see:

* Determine what problem you are trying to solve (for example, I want to know X about my Cisco router)

> * Manually send the corresponding event to the OpenNMS server and see how OpenNMS handles it (see xref:operation:events/sources/send-event.adoc[Manually send events])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Manually send the corresponding event to the {page-component-title} server and see how the event is handled (see xref:operation:events/sources/send-event.adoc[Manually send events])
```

* Make changes to xref:operation:events/sources/mib.adoc[MIB files])
* Configure the event to meet your requirements, if required

> ** <<trap-def-create, Create trap definitions>> to specify criteria for when OpenNMS creates an event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** <<trap-def-create, Create trap definitions>> to specify criteria for when {page-component-title} creates an event
```

         clear(1) minor(2) major(3)&#38lt;/p&#38gt;
         &#38lt;/td;&#38gt;&#38lt;/tr&#38gt;&#38lt;tr&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;b&#38gt;
         c3800SysAggregateStatus&#38lt;/b&#38gt;&#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;%parm[#4]%
         &#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;p;&#38gt;
         clear(1) minor(2) major(3)</p>
         &#38lt;/td;&#38gt;&#38lt;/tr&#38gt;&#38lt;/table&#38gt;
  </descr>
  <logmsg dest='logndisplay'><p>Cisco Event: C3900: Node Status has changed.</p></logmsg>
  <severity>Indeterminate</severity>
</event>
----

This event will match an SNMP trap whose enterprise OID (id) is equal to ".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.70.2", its generic trap value is enterprise specific (6), and the vendor trap value is 17.

//I cannot find a MIB for this, so may need to delete this text. This is an old device, but updating this example would probably be difficult.
The MIB for the C3800 device shows that the generic value 6 and the specific value of 17 for ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange are X and Y respectively.
So the event ...
//

Possible <mename> values include the following:

* uei
* source
* host
* snmphost
* nodeid
* interface
* service
* id

> * specific (vendor-specific error conditions and error codes. Refer to the associated MIB for details.)

Reviewer: there's multiple sentences on this line

* generic (fixed, universal SNMP trap types)
** Coldstart or warmstart
** Linkup or linkdown
** Authentication fails
** egpNeighborloss (Agent cannot communicate with its EGP (Exterior Gateway Protocol) peer.)
* community (community string in an SNMP trap)

Note that the following elements are deprecated: `forward` and `filters`.

You can use the `%` symbol as a wildcard in the mask values.
For example, to match all Cisco events, you could use the following:

[source, xml]
----
<mask>
  <maskelement>
    <mename>id</mename>
    <mevalue>.1.3.6.1.4.1.9.%</mevalue>
  </maskelement>
</mask>
----

Note: The order in which events are listed in the eventconf.xml file is extremely important.
The search will stop with the first event definition that matches the given event (see xref:operation:events/event-configuration.adoc[eventconf.xml]).

> Thus if the code with the wildcard was listed before the more specific ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange event, the latter event would never be generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus if the code with the wildcard was listed before the more specific `ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange` event, the latter event would never be generated.
```

Also note that the wildcard is simply a substring match.

> If a Cisco device generates an event with the enterprise OID of ".1.3.6.1.4.1.9" it would not match this event, as there is no trailing ".".
> If the trailing "." is left off, you must take care so that a trap with an OID of ".1.3.6.1.4.1.99" is listed before the ".1.3.6.1.4.1.9%" event or else it will match the more generic event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a Cisco device generates an event with the enterprise OID of `.1.3.6.1.4.1.9` it would not match this event, as there is no trailing ".".
If the trailing "." is left off, you must take care so that a trap with an OID of `.1.3.6.1.4.1.99` is listed before the `.1.3.6.1.4.1.9%` event or else it will match the more generic event.
```

 is from standby to active and vice versa.</p><table>
 <tr><td><b>
 cHsrpGrpStandbyState</b></td><td>%parm[#1]%
 </td><td><p;>
 initial(1) learn(2) listen(3) speak(4) standby(5) active(6)</p>
 </td;></tr></table>
 </descr>
 <logmsg dest='logndisplay'><p>Cisco Event: HSRP State Change to %parm[#1]%.</p></logmsg>
 <severity>Minor</severity>
 <varbindsdecode>
 <parmid>parm[#1]</parmid>
 <decode varbindvalue="1" varbinddecodedstring="initial"/>
 <decode varbindvalue="2" varbinddecodedstring="learn"/>
 <decode varbindvalue="3" varbinddecodedstring="listen"/>
 <decode varbindvalue="4" varbinddecodedstring="speak"/>
 <decode varbindvalue="5" varbinddecodedstring="standby"/>
 <decode varbindvalue="6" varbinddecodedstring="active"/>
 </varbindsdecode>
</event>
----

The first varbind into the trap (parm[#1]) is translated using the decode map.
If the value of the first OID in this trap is 6 the the log message will be the following:

[source,xml]
----
<p>Cisco Event: HSRP State Change to active.</p>
----

//I'm not sure where to put these two topics
== Trap value representation

> When octet strings are translated into event parameters, OpenNMS first attempts to treat them as character encodings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When octet strings are translated into event parameters, {page-component-title} first attempts to treat them as character encodings.
```

[[ga-events-sources-snmp-traps]]
= SNMP Traps

{page-component-title} can receive and process SNMP traps/informs from SNMP-capable devices out of the box.

> It receives SNMP traps via the xref:reference:daemons/daemon-config-files/trapd.adoc[trapd service daemon], which is enabled by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It receives SNMP traps via the xref:reference:daemons/daemon-config-files/trapd.adoc[Trapd service daemon], which is enabled by default.
```

> IMPORTANT: Disabling trapd renders {page-component-title} incapable of receiving SNMP traps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Disabling Trapd renders {page-component-title} incapable of receiving SNMP traps.
```

> IMPORTANT: Disabling Trapd renders {page-component-title} incapable of receiving SNMP traps.
> 

Reviewer: This feels fairly redundant.  Of course disabling something would cause it to not function.
```suggestion
```

{page-component-title} transforms these traps into events based on event definitions.
{page-component-title} includes trap definitions from many major manufacturers by default, and you can create your own event definitions.

== Before you begin

> There are a few tasks you must complete before OpenNMS can receive SNMP traps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few tasks you must complete before your server can receive SNMP traps:
```

> . Configure the port on which OpenNMS can receive SNMP traps (see xref:deployment:core/getting-started.adoc#receive-snmp-traps[Receive SNMP traps/informs]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Configure the port on which to receive SNMP traps (see xref:deployment:core/getting-started.adoc#receive-snmp-traps[Receive SNMP traps/informs]).
```

By default, {page-component-title} listens on a non-standard port for trap messages.
. Ensure that SNMP-capable devices on your network are configured to send traps to {page-component-title}.

[[trap-config]]

> == SNMP Trap Configuration: How To

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== SNMP trap configuration: how to
```

> Configure SNMP traps to customize the types of trap information you receive and the conditions under which {page-component-title} converts the trap into an event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configure SNMP traps to customize the types of information you receive and the conditions under which {page-component-title} converts the trap into an event.
```

> For example, you may want to see an event only when a device is down, or when a combination of criteria are met (for example, OID X with "major" severity level, and status "indeterminate").

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, you may want to see an event only when a device is down, or when a combination of criteria are met (for example, OID X with "major" severity level and status "indeterminate").
```

These traps are transformed into events only when the conditions you define are met.

There are several ways to configure {page-component-title} to customize the events you receive and see:

> * Determine what problem you are trying to solve (for example, I want to know X about my Cisco router)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Determine what problem you are trying to solve (for example, "I want to know X about my Cisco router").
```

> * Manually send the corresponding event to the {page-component-title} server and see how the event is handled (see xref:operation:events/sources/send-event.adoc[Manually send events])
> * Make changes to xref:operation:events/mib.adoc[SNMP MIB compiler])
> * Configure the event to meet your requirements, if required
> ** <<trap-def-create, Create trap definitions>> to specify criteria for when {page-component-title} creates an event
> ** <<varbind-filter,Filter on variable bindings>> for further granularity on the conditions for creating an event

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Manually send the corresponding event to the {page-component-title} server and see how the event is handled (see xref:operation:events/sources/send-event.adoc[Manually send events]).
* Make changes to the xref:operation:events/mib.adoc[SNMP MIB compiler]).
* Configure the event to meet your requirements, if required.
** <<trap-def-create, Create trap definitions>> to specify criteria for when {page-component-title} creates an event.
** <<varbind-filter,Filter on variable bindings>> for further granularity on the conditions for creating an event.
```

[[trap-def-create]]
=== Create event definition for an SNMP trap
{page-component-title} includes event definitions for traps from many vendors' equipment.
Use the `mask` tag to match SNMP traps in `eventconf.xml`.

> See xref:operation:events/anatomy-events.adoc#ga-events-anatomy-of-an-event[Anatomy of an Event] for details on event structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See xref:operation:events/anatomy-events.adoc#ga-events-anatomy-of-an-event[Anatomy of an event] for details on event structure.
```

         c3800SysNextTrapSeqNum&#38lt;/b&#38gt;</td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;%parm[#1]%
         &#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;p;&#38gt;</p&#38gt;&#38lt;/td;&#38gt;&#38lt;/tr&#38gt;&#38lt;tr&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;b&#38gt;
         sysName&#38lt;/b&#38gt;&#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;%parm[#2]%
         &#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;p;&#38gt;&#38lt;/p&#38gt;&#38lt;/td;&#38gt;&#38lt;/tr&#38gt;&#38lt;tr&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;b&#38gt;
         c3800SysTrapSeverity&#38lt;/b&#38gt;&#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;%parm[#3]%
         &#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;p;&#38gt;
         clear(1) minor(2) major(3)&#38lt;/p&#38gt;
         &#38lt;/td;&#38gt;&#38lt;/tr&#38gt;&#38lt;tr&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;b&#38gt;
         c3800SysAggregateStatus&#38lt;/b&#38gt;&#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;%parm[#4]%
         &#38lt;/td&#38gt;&#38lt;td&#38gt;&#38lt;p;&#38gt;
         clear(1) minor(2) major(3)</p>
         &#38lt;/td;&#38gt;&#38lt;/tr&#38gt;&#38lt;/table&#38gt;
  </descr>
  <logmsg dest='logndisplay'><p>Cisco Event: C3900: Node Status has changed.</p></logmsg>
  <severity>Indeterminate</severity>
</event>
----

> This event will match an SNMP trap whose enterprise OID (id) is equal to `.1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.70.2`, its generic trap value is enterprise specific `6`, and the vendor trap value is `17`.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this maintains the meaning we're going for here. If it doesn't, I would suggest breaking this into two sentences.

```suggestion
This event will match an SNMP trap where the enterprise OID (id) is equal to `.1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.70.2`, the generic trap value is equal to `6` (enterprise-specific), and the vendor trap value is equal to `17`.
```

Reviewer 3: It does maintain the meaning still. I read it just fine.

//I cannot find a MIB for this, so may need to delete this text. This is an old device, but updating this example would probably be difficult.
The MIB for the C3800 device shows that the generic value 6 and the specific value of 17 for ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange are X and Y respectively.
So the event ...
//

Possible <mename> values include the following:

* uei
* source
* host
* snmphost
* nodeid
* interface
* service
* id

> * specific (vendor-specific error conditions and error codes.

Author: I don't think vendor needs to be capitalized, but have added the closing parenthesis.

Refer to the associated MIB for details.)
* generic (fixed, universal SNMP trap types)
** Coldstart or warmstart
** Linkup or linkdown
** Authentication fails
** egpNeighborloss (Agent cannot communicate with its EGP (Exterior Gateway Protocol) peer.)
* community (community string in an SNMP trap)

Note that the following elements are deprecated: `forward` and `filters`.

You can use the `%` symbol as a wildcard in the mask values.
For example, to match all Cisco events, you could use the following:

[source, xml]
----
<mask>
  <maskelement>
    <mename>id</mename>
    <mevalue>.1.3.6.1.4.1.9.%</mevalue>
  </maskelement>
</mask>
----

NOTE: The order in which events are listed in the eventconf.xml file is extremely important.
The search will stop with the first event definition that matches the given event (see xref:operation:events/event-configuration.adoc[eventconf.xml]).

> Thus if the code with the wildcard was listed before the more specific `ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange` event, the latter event would never be generated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As such, if the code with the wildcard was listed before the more specific `ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange` event, the latter event would never be generated.
```

> As such, if the code with the wildcard was listed before the more specific `ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange` event, the latter event would never be generated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As such, if the code with the wildcard is listed before the more specific `ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange` event, the latter event will never be generated.
```

Also note that the wildcard is simply a substring match.
If a Cisco device generates an event with the enterprise OID of `.1.3.6.1.4.1.9` it would not match this event, as there is no trailing ".".
If the trailing "." is left off, you must take care so that a trap with an OID of `.1.3.6.1.4.1.99` is listed before the `.1.3.6.1.4.1.9%` event or else it will match the more generic event.

== Use the `parm` replacement token with trap events

> Some events, especially SNMP traps, have additional information sent with them called "variable bindings" or "varbinds" for short.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some events, especially SNMP traps, have additional information sent with them called "variable bindings" (varbinds).
```

In the `ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange` event listed above, there are four of them.
You can use the `parm` replacement token to access them.
Each parameter consists of a name and a value.

For example, the `ciscoC3800SysAggregateStatusChange` event description lists out each of the parameters.

> Thus the second paramater, the `sysName` is printed out using `%parm[#2]%`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus the second paramater, the `sysName`, is printed using `%parm[#2]%`.
```

We rewrite our event as follows:

[source, xml]
----
<mask>
  <maskelement>
    <mename>id</mename>
    <mevalue>.1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.70.2</mevalue>
  </maskelement>
  <maskelement>
    <mename>generic</mename>
    <mevalue>6</mevalue>
  </maskelement>
  <maskelement>
    <mename>specific</mename>
    <mevalue>17</mevalue>
  </maskelement>
  <varbind>
    <vbnumber>3</vbnumber>
    <vbvalue>3</vbvalue>
  </varbind>
</mask>
----

In the example, adding a mask with a varbind tag will match on the same ID, generic, and specific values, but also requires that the third parameter is equal to "3" (indicating a Cisco-determined trap severity of "major").

With a "status change" event, you may want to create separate events for each status value.
To do this, copy the event definition once for each status value, add the varbind mask, and then change the UEI, description, severity, and logmsg to match the event.

You can also match more than one varbind and more than one value per varbind:

[source,xml]
----
<varbind>
  <vbnumber>3</vbnumber>
  <vbvalue>2</vbvalue>
  <vbvalue>3</vbvalue>
</varbind>
<varbind>
  <vbnumber>4</vbnumber>
  <vbvalue>2</vbvalue>
  <vbvalue>3</vbvalue>
</varbind>
----

> The above code snippet will match if the third parameter has a value of "2" or "3" AND the fourth parameter has a value of "2" or "3".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above code snippet will match if the third parameter has a value of "2" or "3" _and_ the fourth parameter has a value of "2" or "3".
```

Author: Good catch! :-)

You can also use a regular expression match on the varbind value.
Just specify the expression prefixed with a with a "~":

[source,xml]
----
<varbind>
  <vbnumber>1</vbnumber>
  <vbvalue>~[Dd]own</vbvalue>
</varbind>
----

> This will match a varbind 1 containing the word "Down" or "down" anywhere within its value.

Author: I'll see what I can do.

> This will match a varbind 1 containing the word "Down" or "down" anywhere within its value.

Author: ```suggestion
This will match a varbind 1 that contains the word "Down" or "down" anywhere within its value.
```

You can also do quick prefix matches with the '%' in a varbind value:

[source,xml]
----
<varbind>
  <vbnumber>1</vbnumber>
  <vbvalue>Error:%</vbvalue>
</varbind>
----

This will match varbind 1 with any string beginning with "Error:".

REMINDER: The order in which events are listed is very important.
Put the most specific events first.

== Decode varbinds

A lot of MIBs define specific variables to code the value of some OIDs.
As an example, the SNMP agent returns a numerical value for the `ifAdminStatus` and `ifOperStatus`: 1 means Up and 2 means Down.

> Because {page-component-title} does not have a MIB parser, we usually put this map (between the numerical encoded value and its meaning) into the event description.

Author: In this case, people pronounce it as "mib" rather than "em eye bee", so will stick with "a".

Use the `varbindsdecode` element to convert the event varbind value into a decoded String.

> With a properly configured event, you can decode the numerical value sent into trap varbinds and the corresponding String value into the `logmsg`.

Author: ```suggestion
With `varbindsdecode`, {product-component-title) decodes the numerical value sent into trap varbinds to the corresponding String values which then can be substituted into the logmsg.
```

> With a properly configured event, you can decode the numerical value sent into trap varbinds and the corresponding String value into the `logmsg`.

Author: ```suggestion
With `varbindsdecode`, {page-component-title} decodes the numerical value sent into trap varbinds to the corresponding String values, which then can be substituted into the logmsg.
```

Because {page-component-title} does not have a MIB parser, we usually put this map (between the numerical encoded value and its meaning) into the event description.
Use the `varbindsdecode` element to convert the event varbind value into a decoded String.

> With a properly configured event, you can decode the numerical value sent into trap varbinds and the corresponding String value into the `logmsg`.

Reviewer 3: How about this?

With varbindsdecode, OpenNMS decodes the numerical value sent into trap varbinds to the corresponding String values which then can be substituted into the logmsg.
